---
layout: post
title: Local field
author: Iris Hu
date: 2025-11-03
categories: 
katex: true
---
$$
\def\RR{\mathbb{R}}
\def\NN{\mathbb{N}}
\def\QQ{\mathbb{Q}}
\def\vect#1{\mathbf{#1}}
\def\abs#1{\left|#1\right|}
$$


[Milne ANT Ex. 7-5]
	Find all the quadratic extensions of $\mathbb Q_2$. Hint: there are exactly 7 (up to $\QQ_2$-isomorphism). 

	
<div class="lemma">

All quadratic extensions of a field $1$ with $1$ are of the form $F()$, for $d$ not a square in $F$.

</div>

	
<div class="proof">

If $K/F$ is a quadratic extension, since $(F) 2$, $K/F$ is seperable. Thus, it is isomorphic to $F[x]/(p(x))$ for $p(x)$ an irreducible monic quadratic polynomial. Then the result follows from the quadratic formula: the zeros of a monic quadratic polynomial $x^2+bx+c$ are \[x=}{2},\] so to obtain an extension of degree 2 it is sufficient and necessary to adjoin the square root $$, for $b^2-4c$ not a square.

</div>

	Since $(_2)=0$ (as any extension of $$ must be), a quadratic extension of $_2$ must be of the form $_2( d)$ for some $d_2^*$. In particular, $d$ is an element of $_2^*(_2^*)^2$. 
	
<div class="lemma">

Let $a,b_2^*(_2^*)^2$. Then $_2()_2()$ if and only if $a=x^2 b$ for some $x_2^*$.

</div>

	
<div class="proof">

($$) Immediate, since $= x$. 

		($$) Given a $_2$-isomorphism $:_2()_2()$, we have that $()=u+v$ for some unique $u,v_2$. So \[0=(0)=(()^2-a)=(u+v b)^2-a.\] Hence $a=(u+v)^2=(u^2+bv^2)+(2uv)$, so exactly one of $u$, $v$ is 0. (They cannot both be 0 because $a 0$.) If $v=0$ then $a=u^2_2$, a contradiction since we assumed $a$ was not a square. So $u=0$, and $a=v^2b$, as desired.

</div>

	
		This is not specific to $_2$; this proof works in general whenever the characteristic of the base field is not 2. 
	

	So to classify all possible quadratic extensions of $_2$, we should consider the group $_2^*/(_2^*)^2$; i.e. all elements of $_2^*$ up to a square. Given $x_2^*$, we can uniquely decompose $x=2^{v_2(x)}u$ for a unit $u_2^*$, so we have that $_2^*_2^*$. Squaring gets us $x^2=2^{2v_2(x)}u^2$, and as this decomposition is unique, we see that $(_2^*)^2 2(_2^*)^2$. Hence we have \[_2^*/(_2^*)^2 (/2)(_2^*/(_2^*)^2).\] 
	So it is sufficient to study $_2^*/(_2^*)^2$. Here we can use a specific form of Hensel's lemma. 
	
<div class="theorem">

[Hensel's lemma]
		Let $A$ be a complete discrete valuation ring, $f(x) A[x]$, with $a A$ satisfying \[|f(a)|<|f'(a)|^2.\] Then there is a unique $ A$ with $f()=0$ in $A$ and $|-a||{f'(a)^2}|$.

</div>

	
<div class="lemma">

		$u_2^*$ is a square in $_2^*$ if and only if $u 1$.

</div>

	
			Note that if $u=v^2$ for $v_2$, we have $1=|u|=|v|^2$, so $v$ itself must be in $_2^*$. Thus requiring $u$ to be a square in $_2^*$ is not so restrictive. 
	
	
<div class="proof">

($$) Recall that $_2/8_2/8$. (To see this, consider the mod 8 reduction map $:_2/8$. Then $=8_2$, and we are done by the first isomorphism theorem.) Hence if $u$ is a square, reducing mod $8_2$ gets us that $u1$, since 1 is the only quadratic residue in $(/8)^*$. 

		($$) Let $u1+8_2$ and $f(x)=x^2-u$. If $a=1$, we can see $|f(a)|=|1-u|{8}$ and $|f'(a)|^2=|2|^2={4}$. By our version of Hensel's lemma, we can lift $a=1$ to a unique $_2$ which satisfies $u=^2$. By our remark, we conclude that $$ is actually in $_2^*$, meaning $u$ is a square in $_2^*$.

</div>

	Given the mod 8 reduction map $:_2^*(/8)^*$ induced by $:_2/8$, we note that $=1+8_2$. Hence by Lemma , $$ induces an isomorphism $_2^*/(_2^*)^2(/8)^*$. Putting all of this together, we see 
	\[_2^*/(_2^*)^2 (/2)(_2^*/(_2^*)^2)(/2)(/8)^*.\] In particular, there are $|_2^*/(_2^*)^2|-1=7$ quadratic extensions of $_2$ up to isomorphism, as the hint tells us. (We discard the class representing 1, as that is not actually a quadratic extension.) To find explicit representatives, we note our first $/2$ comes from the free group generated by $2$, which descends to the class of $2$ in $_2^*/(_2^*)^2$. $(/8)^*$ is generated by $-1$ and $3$, so by picking representatives of $_2^*/(_2^*)^2$ we see our 7 quadratic extensions of $_2$ are $_2()$, where $x\{-1, 3, 2, 6\}$.
	
	
<div class="lemma">

For $p>2$, $_p^*_{p-1}(1+p_p)$, where $_{p-1}$ are the $(p-1)$st roots of unity. For $p=2$, $_p^*(/2)_p$.

</div>

	
<div class="proof">

Ordinarily, for a prime $p$, we could consider the natural reduction-mod-$p$ map $:_p^*_p^*$. This map fits into a short exact sequence \[1 1+p_p_p^*{}_p^* 1.\] Consider $f(x)=x^{p-1}-1$, which has derivative $f'(x)=(p-1)x^{p-2}0 p$. Since all of $_p^*$ are zeros of $f(x)$, they can each be lifted uniquely to $_p^*$, and form the $(p-1)$st roots of unity $_{p-1}$. This lifting induces a splitting morphism from $_p^*$ to $_p^*$, and thus the exact sequence is split. So we have $_p^*_{p-1}(1+p_p)$.

</div>

	
	

